---

title: "Why your why will fail to motivate you"
categories:
  - Life
tags:
  - motivation
---

So many of us go through life trying to keep up with the expectations of the world. Hey, did you check that new model of Range Rover? Or do you know what Amal Clooney wore to the airport last week? And by the way, did you see Kendall’s new outfit at Cannes? Gosh, that dress! Urmm, who is that new girl Channing Tatum is dating?

Trust me, I don’t blame you. Especially, when our very dear Google puts that in your face every morning with those sexy catchy click-baits.

And yet every time we hover over the question — how do a few in the world seem to have everything while the others don’t, we are hit back with a huge number of questions in return. What did they do differently? Or what makes them get out of the bed and do it every single day? And they look pretty happy and energetic all the time. But their job must be physically draining too. Then how come all those famous athletes, all the mega film stars, all the high profile fashion designers always seem to find the motivation to do whatever it takes when I don’t. What..? How.. ? Why?

Some of the smart ones among us will remark — “Hey, but they can do whatever they love. They don’t have to worry about taking care of the basic luxuries of life like paying the rent, gas prices or the grocery bills. They can focus on the things that truly matter” And they’re right. We’ll have to admit. Okay, well at least to some extent!

And then some other interesting opinions come in — like, “You know what? It’s much easier to take big risks when you have daddy’s huge business to fall back on” and they are also right. And finally, some will have very keen observations like “Dude’s simply gotten lucky. He was in the right place, at the right time, had the right set of friends. Of course, he has it all” and they are also right. So I won’t even bother to dissect and justify that small subsection of the ones who have it all.

Today, I wanna talk about those who rose from nothing to something, fell from the graces at the top — publicly and disastrously. But then rose back up again — bigger, better, stronger. Yes, the underdogs. Not the one time wonders, but people who did it over and over again. But without any name-dropping, since I know you know a million of those names and their stories already.

I will simply leave you with a hypothesis today. Not a rule. But just one hypothesis. One, that I believe is true. And yet, I am no expert so I won’t claim to be the only truth.

I think what makes the good great and eventually, the genius is no ten step process or a 168-page book of formulas. They are men and women of action. And behind every action is some motivation. Thus, it’s quite easy to deduct that behind the lack of action is simply a lack of motivation. Lack of skills is an easy fix. Just take a course of Udacity or Coursera. Lack of hair is easy to fix. Drooping skin is easy to fix. Bad skin odor is easy to fix.

    But how does one fix the lack of motivation?

Well for the starters, there is a huge list of resources from Life Hacker, Medium blogs, Entrepreneur Magazine click baits on Facebook, TED videos and tons of self help books at Waterstones or Barnes & Nobles based on whatever medium you prefer. But do they really fix it? No. There is no better way to put it but no they don’t. What about that one question the neuroscientist suggest is all you need to get out of the rut? The one that went something like — “what do you have on the line to lose if you decide to do x?”. No. No. No.

They offer great systems. Excellent systems. But do not motivate action. How do you know? Chances are even if you ask yourself that question, you still won’t take action since if it was that easy, you would have done it already. It’s not that you are scared of losing. Then what’s the reason that I don’t have the motivation to do what I need to do to change my life and circumstances? The reason is what Simon Sinek says — you just don’t have a strong “why”.
Simon Sinek, TED Sept 2009 : How Great Leaders Inspire Action

There are many good why’s in life. Why’s like — I wanna register my name in the pages of history or I wanna change the world or I wanna be a better person. But unfortunately, the mind is a very interesting device that can manipulate whoever, even yourself, when the going gets hard. So we need a much stronger “why”.

A strong why is the one that needs no reminder. Something that comes from within. Something that the mind cannot manipulate. You might be tempted to ask, “Is there any like that?” The answer is — Yes! The human mind while mindbogglingly complex, also is beautifully simple.

I have come to observe that love and anger are two of the strongest emotions that can lead one into taking positive action towards something that isn’t as natural as sustenance. That said, in case of sustenance, pain trumps all. But going at a goal with a whole lot of pain for the next 20 years doesn’t seem like a good idea or even sustainable. No matter how hard you try stay in pain, there will always be those few good moments when the pain would disappear and you will forget the why.

Pain can only last for only so long before our “evil mind” tricks us out of that too. Uhm then, what about love and anger? I guess the same can be said for both love and anger. Both do disappear at times and sometimes for a very long duration of time or maybe even forever.

    Then how to find the “why” to always feeling motivated?

I guess the answer is very intuitive. Have you ever seen a true creative at his job? He seems to be all in. Some experts have called it flow state. There are plenty of books that will give you a ten-step process to getting and staying in the flow state. But since I haven’t read any so I can’t recommend any. But what I can recommend is — look around and observe what is it that “the ones we wanna be” and “the longing ones” do differently. Can you spot any patterns already?

“The longing ones” go into a task all in. But when they get done they dream. They dream about — how the world would finally notice them, and all the things they’ll say to their loved ones, to the ones they looked up to, and to those who doubted them and called them losers. How they would frame the answers to those millions of questions — the interviewers at Forbes, CNN and the Ellen DeGeneres Show would ask them. “So what inspired you to work on this?… Tell our audience a bit more about the problems you faced to bring it to reality…”. How everyone will be inspired by their story and what all wonderful things will be said in their honor that would make this grind worth it, one day! In that moment, they feel in complete bliss. Validation, lots of validation. All those sleepless nights were worth it maybe. But isn’t it wrong to do something for others’ validation?

Everyone, successful or not, does look for validation. So I won’t even dare suggest something as irrational as, “Do it for yourself, not for others’ validation” since that doesn’t help the cause. Humans are social creatures who crave to fit in and belong. Bereft of that, one is very much likely to end up in depression, or so happens to be claimed by top social scientists at some very prestigious journals in multiple studies.

Now, “the ones we wanna be” also do their work all in. The same thing called flow state, that “the longing ones” did. But with a slight difference. Post that, they don’t dream about the possibilities and how the world will rush to kiss their ass. I do not mean to suggest that they don’t care about the feedback, they do. Of course, they do. And very much so. Otherwise, they won’t be selling and would die penniless in some dinge no one cared about. But there’s a tiny trick to it.

If you interview them about it, they’ll also probably say, “I didn’t wanna let down my team, my family and myself… The odds were stacked against me and I wanted to prove the doubters wrong… Losing was simply not an option… I love what I do to the extent I would even do it for free”. But there’s something very different that happens neurologically when they are “in the task” — that essentially separates the two.

While “the longing ones” derive the bliss from being able to visualize their goals as a result of the work they put in, “the ones we wanna be” derive bliss from doing that thing. As a result, “the longing ones” do something for the output while “the ones we wanna be” do something just because they feel lucky enough to have the chance to be able to do it.

That attitude is what separates the two.

Imagine if everything we did — every job application we made, every book we read, every dance move we made — every single moment we lived — we did it all just because we consider ourselves lucky to have the chance to be alive to be able to do it. In that moment, something in you starts to shift. Suddenly, every task isn’t just a task but rather an expression of yourself.

You aren’t just a doer but a creative, who creates for the unadulterated love of it. And when your job is over, you still long to feel like the bliss you felt while working, over and over again. Despite that you are done with the day, you feel deeply, madly in love like a completely hopeless romantic with whatever you had at hand.

Now, you don’t care even if it’s rather repetitive. You are just so thankful to be so close to it and to discover more about it — every small intricate detail that your eyes somehow managed to miss the last time.

Now, even if you fail you just wanna go back in and do it all over again. Not because you aren’t afraid of failure. Not because criticism doesn’t hurt you. Neither because you are a winner. And nor because you won’t settle for less. But just so you could feel the bliss you did, when you were “in it”.

It felt like the beauty of that work embraced you, it just possessed you. Like you weren’t yourself anymore, but a body dedicated to the art of doing it to the best of your ability. And in that moment, nothing else matters.
Image for post
Image for post

I guess that kind of love with everything you do is the only motivation that can make you jump out of the bed every morning without an alarm clock or without hitting a snooze. Since that “why” needs no reminder for it will always be lingering within, with every breath you take, asking for more.

My hypothesis is that that attitude is the only thing which probably separates the ones who wanna make it in the world from the ones who really do. It is that attitude that lies within these. The ones — who simply cannot be ignored. Love them or hate them but Google will keep reminding you of them, over and over again. These are the ones, we call GENIUS…